1	1	Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus, and Timothy, a brother: to Philemon, our beloved and fellow labourer,
1	2	And to Appia, our dearest sister, and to Archippus, our fellow soldier, and to the church which is in thy house.
1	3	Grace to you and peace, from God our Father and from the Lord Jesus Christ.
1	4	I give thanks to my God, always making a remembrance of thee in my prayers.
1	5	Hearing of thy charity and faith, which thou hast in the Lord Jesus and towards all the saints:
1	6	That the communication of thy faith may be made evident in the acknowledgment of every good work that is in you in Christ Jesus.
1	7	For I have had great joy and consolation in thy charity, because the bowels of the saints have been refreshed by thee, brother.
1	8	Wherefore, though I have much confidence in Christ Jesus to command thee that which is to the purpose:
1	9	For charity sake I rather beseech, whereas thou art such a one, as Paul, an old man and now a prisoner also of Jesus Christ.
1	10	I beseech thee for my son, whom I have begotten in my bands, Onesimus,
1	11	Who hath been heretofore unprofitable to thee but now is profitable both to me and thee:
1	12	Whom I have sent back to thee. And do thou receive him as my own bowels.
1	13	Whom I would have retained with me, that in thy stead he might have ministered to me in the bands of the gospel.
1	14	But without thy counsel I would do nothing: that thy good deed might not be as it were of necessity, but voluntary.
1	15	For perhaps he therefore departed for a season from thee that thou mightest receive him again for ever:
1	16	Not now as a servant, but instead of a servant, a most dear brother, especially to me. But how much more to thee, both in the flesh and in the Lord?
1	17	If therefore thou count me a partner, receive him as myself.
1	18	And if he hath wronged thee in any thing or is in thy debt, put that to my account.
1	19	I Paul have written it with my own hand: I will repay it: not to say to thee that thou owest me thy own self also.
1	20	Yea, brother. May I enjoy thee in the Lord! Refresh my bowels in the Lord.
1	21	Trusting in thy obedience, I have written to thee: knowing that thou wilt also do more than I say.
1	22	But withal prepare me also a lodging. For I hope that through your prayers I shall be given unto you.
1	23	There salute thee Epaphras, my fellow prisoner in Christ Jesus:
1	24	Mark, Aristarchus, Demas and Luke, my fellow labourers.
1	25	The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen.
