1	1	The word of the Lord, that came to Joel, the son of Phatuel.
1	2	Hear this, ye old men, and give ear, all ye inhabitants of the land: did this ever happen in your days, or in the days of your fathers?
1	3	Tell ye of this to your children, and let your children tell their children, and their children to another generation.
1	4	That which the palmerworm hath left, the locust hath eaten: and that which the locust hath left, the bruchus hath eaten: and that which the bruchus hath left, the mildew hath destroyed.
1	5	Awake, ye that are drunk, and weep, and mourn all ye that take delight; in drinking sweet wine: for it is cut off from your mouth.
1	6	For a nation come up upon my land, strong, and without number: his teeth are like the teeth of a lion: and his cheek teeth as of a lion’s whelp.
1	7	He hath laid my vineyard waste, and hath pilled off the bark of my fig tree: he hath stripped it bare, and cast it away; the branches thereof are made white.
1	8	Lament like a virgin girded with sackcloth for the husband of her youth.
1	9	Sacrifice and libation is cut off from the house of the Lord: the priests, the Lord’s ministers, have mourned:
1	10	The country is destroyed, the ground hath mourned: for the corn is wasted, the wine is confounded, the oil hath languished.
1	11	The husbandmen are ashamed, the vinedressers have howled for the wheat, and for the barley, because the harvest of the field is perished.
1	12	The vineyard is confounded, and the fig tree hath languished: the pomegranate tree, and the palm tree, and the apple tree, and all the trees of the field are withered: because joy is withdrawn from the children of men.
1	13	Gird yourselves, and lament, O ye priests, howl, ye ministers of the altars: go in, lie in sackcloth, ye ministers of my God: because sacrifice and libation is cut off from the house of your God.
1	14	Sanctify ye a fast, call an assembly, gather together the ancients, all the inhabitants of the land into the house of your God: and cry ye to the Lord:
1	15	Ah, ah, ah, for the day: because the day of the Lord is at hand, and it shall come like destruction from the mighty.
1	16	Is not your food cut off before your eyes, joy and gladness from the house of our God?
1	17	The beasts have rotted in their dung, the barns are destroyed, the storehouses are broken down: because the corn is confounded.
1	18	Why did the beasts groan, why did the herds of cattle low? because there is no pasture for them: yea, and the flocks of sheep are perished.
1	19	To thee, O Lord, will I cry: because fire hath devoured the beautiful places of the wilderness: and the flame hath burnt all the trees of the country.
1	20	Yea, and the beasts of the field have looked up to thee, as a garden bed that thirsteth after rain, for the springs of waters are dried up, and fire hath devoured the beautiful places of the wilderness.
2	1	Blow ye the trumpet in Sion, sound an alarm in my holy mountain, let all the inhabitants of the land tremble: because the day of the Lord cometh, because it is nigh at hand.
2	2	A day of darkness, and of gloominess, a day of clouds and whirlwinds: a numerous and strong people as the morning spread upon the mountains: the like to it hath not been from the beginning, nor shall be after it, even to the years of generation and generation.
2	3	Before the face thereof a devouring fire, and behind it a burning flame: the land is like a garden of pleasure before it, and behind it a desolate wilderness, neither is there any one that can escape it.
2	4	The appearance of them is as the appearance of horses, and they shall run like horsemen.
2	5	They shall leap like the noise of chariots upon the tops of mountains, like the noise of a flame of fire devouring the stubble, as a strong people prepared to battle.
2	6	At their presence the people shall be in grievous pains: all faces shall be made like a kettle.
2	7	They shall run like valiant men: like men of war they shall scale the wall: the men shall march every one on his way, and they shall not turn aside from their ranks.
2	8	No one shall press upon his brother: they shall walk every one in his path: yea, and they shall fall through the windows, and shall take no harm.
2	9	They shall enter into the city: they shall run upon the wall, they shall climb up the houses, they shall come in at the windows, as a thief.
2	10	At their presence the earth hath trembled, the heavens are moved: the sun and moon are darkened, and the stars have withdrawn their shining.
2	11	And the Lord hath uttered his voice before the face of his army: for his armies are exceedingly great, for they are strong, and execute his word: for the day of the Lord is great and very terrible: and who can stand it?
2	12	Now, therefore, saith the Lord. Be converted to me with all your heart, in fasting, and in weeping, and mourning.
2	13	And rend your hearts, and not your garments and turn to the Lord your God: for he is gracious and merciful, patient and rich in mercy, and ready to repent of the evil.
2	14	Who knoweth but he will return, and forgive, and leave a blessing behind him, sacrifice and libation to the Lord your God?
2	15	Blow the trumpet in Sion, sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly,
2	16	Gather together the people, sanctify the church, assemble the ancients, gather together the little ones, and them that suck at the breasts: let the bridegroom go forth from his bed, and the bride out of her bridal chamber.
2	17	Between the porch and the altar the priests, the Lord’s ministers, shall weep, and shall say: Spare, O Lord, spare thy people: and give not thy inheritance to reproach, that the heathens should rule over them. Why should they say among the nations: Where is their God?
2	18	The Lord hath been zealous for his land, and hath spared his people.
2	19	And the Lord answered, and said to his people: Behold I will send you corn, and wine, and oil, and you shall be filled with them: and I will no more make you a reproach among the nations.
2	20	And I will remove far off from you the northern enemy: and I will drive him into a land unpassable, and desert, with his face towards the east sea, and his hinder part towards the utmost sea: and his stench shall ascend, and his rottenness shall go up, because he hath done proudly.
2	21	Fear not, O land, be glad, and rejoice: for the Lord hath done great things.
2	22	Fear not, ye beasts of the fields: for the beautiful places of the wilderness are sprung, for the tree hath brought forth its fruit, the fig tree, and the vine have yielded their strength.
2	23	And you, O children of Sion, rejoice, and be joyful in the Lord your God: because he hath given you a teacher of justice, and he will make the early and the latter rain to come down to you as in the beginning.
2	24	And the floors shall be filled with wheat, and the presses shall overflow with wine, and oil.
2	25	And I will restore to you the years which the locust, and the bruchus, and the mildew, and the palmerworm hath eaten; my great host which I sent upon you.
2	26	And you shall eat in plenty, and shall be filled and you shall praise the name of the Lord your God; who hath done wonders with you, and my people shall not be confounded for ever.
2	27	And you shall know that I am in the midst of Israel: and I am the Lord your God, and there is none besides: and my people shall not be confounded forever.
2	28	And it shall come to pass after this, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh: and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy: your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions.
2	29	Moreover, upon my servants and handmaids in those days I will pour forth my spirit.
2	30	And I will shew wonders in heaven; and in earth, blood, and fire, and vapour of smoke.
2	31	The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood: before the great and dreadful day of the Lord doth come.
2	32	And it shall come to pass, that every one that shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved: for in Mount Sion, and in Jerusalem shall be salvation, as the Lord hath said, and in the residue whom the Lord shall call.
3	1	For behold in those days, and in that time when I shall bring back the captivity of Juda, and Jerusalem:
3	2	I will gather together all nations and will bring them down into the valley of Josaphat: and I will plead with them there for my people, and for my inheritance, Israel, whom they have scattered among the nations, and have parted my land.
3	3	And they have cast lots upon my people: and the boy they have put in the stews, and the girl they have sold for wine, that they might drink.
3	4	But what have you to do with me, O Tyre, and Sidon, and all the coast of the Philistines? will you revenge yourselves on me? and if you revenge yourselves on me, I will very soon return you a recompense upon your own head.
3	5	For you have taken away my silver, and my gold: and my desirable, and most beautiful things you have carried into your temples.
3	6	And the children of Juda, and the children of Jerusalem, you have sold to the children of the Greeks, that you might remove them far off from their own country.
3	7	Behold, I will raise them up out of the place wherein you have sold them: and I will return your recompense upon your own heads.
3	8	And I will sell your sons, and your daughters, by the hands of the children of Juda, and they shall sell them to the Sabeans, a nation far off, for the Lord hath spoken it.
3	9	Proclaim ye this among the nations: Prepare war, raise up the strong: let them come, let all the men of war come up.
3	10	Cut your ploughshares into swords, and your spades into spears. Let the weak say: I am strong.
3	11	Break forth, and come, all ye nations from round about, and gather yourselves together: there will the Lord cause all thy strong ones to fall down.
3	12	Let them arise, and let the nations come up into the valley of Josaphat: for there I will sit to judge all nations round about.
3	13	Put ye in the sickles, for the harvest is ripe: come and go down, for the press is full, the fats run over: for their wickedness is multiplied.
3	14	Nations, nations in the valley of destruction: for the day of the Lord is near in the valley of destruction.
3	15	The sun and the moon are darkened, and the stars have withdrawn their shining.
3	16	And the Lord shall roar out of Sion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem: and the heavens and the earth shall be moved, and the Lord shall be the hope of his people, and the strength of the children of Israel.
3	17	And you shall know that I am the Lord your God, dwelling in Sion, my holy mountain: and Jerusalem shall be holy, and strangers shall pass through it no more.
3	18	And it shall come to pass in that day, that the mountains shall drop down sweetness, and the hills shall flow with milk: and waters shall flow through all the rivers of Juda: and a fountain shall come forth of the house of the Lord, and shall water the torrent of thorns.
3	19	Egypt shall be a desolation, and Edom a wilderness destroyed: because they have done unjustly against the children of Juda, and have shed innocent blood in their land.
3	20	And Judea shall be inhabited for ever, and Jerusalem to generation and generation.
3	21	And I will cleanse their blood, which I had not cleansed: and the Lord will dwell in Sion.
